# Abstract

Learning predictive latent structure from unclustered neural spike trains

Understanding the low-dimensional generative processes that shape neural population activity is a central goal of systems neuroscience. However, there remains a need for data processing and dimensionality reduction methods that are compatible with the exploding scale of data acquisition. Existing approaches rely on spike sorting (a time intensive process that discards many low-confidence events) and binned firing rates (which imposes temporal smoothing that obscures fast dynamics). Moreover, reconstructive objectives tend to emphasize dominant activity patterns, making it difficult to capture rare but behaviorally informative neural events. Here we introduce Contrastive Prediction of Point-Process Observations (C3PO), a architecture for inferring latent neural generative variables directly from unclustered spike trains. C3PO models neural activity as a marked point process, operating on continuous spike times and waveform features without spike sorting. Using an objective derived from noise-contrastive estimation, the model learns a low-dimensional context representation which captures the predictive information in the waveform data. We demonstrate this method robustly captures known neural-coding dynamics across varied species and brain regions. Furthermore, we leverage the point-process nature of the model to identify higher-frequency fluctuations in the population dynamics and relate these to behavioral variables. Together, these results establish C3PO as a scalable, unsupervised approach for uncovering generative structure in high-dimensional neural data.
